# States, evolutions and measurements

- [Introduction telling about the need for states, evolution and measurement and saying we'll give a mathematical formulation of quantum theory with little mention to physical systems + refs.]
- A *pure quantum state* is described by a unit vector in a Hilbert space. Following along the tradition, we will denote a $d$-dimensional Hilbert space as $\mathcal{H}^d$, and unit vectors in it as $\lvert \psi \rangle$, where $\psi$ is some label that describes the state. Similar notation is used for the dual vector $\left( \lvert \psi \rangle \right)^\dagger \equiv \langle \psi \rvert$, which is useful to write the inner product between any two vectors in the same space as $\langle \psi \vert \phi \rangle$, and the outer product as $\lvert \psi \rangle \langle \phi \rvert$. An useful geometric intuition on these products is to interpret the inner product as the overlap between $\vert \psi \rangle$ and $\vert \phi \rangle$, and an outer product $\lvert \psi \rangle \langle \psi \rvert$ as a projection onto $\lvert  \psi \rangle$. Only finite-dimensional spaces will be considered, and of utmost importance will be the properties that, $\forall \lvert \psi \rangle, \lvert \phi \rangle, \lvert \xi \rangle \in \mathcal{H}^d,$ (i) $\alpha \lvert \psi \rangle + \beta \lvert \phi \rangle \in \mathcal{H}^d$, where $\alpha, \beta \in \mathbb{C}$, (ii) $\langle \xi \rvert \left( \alpha \lvert \psi \rangle + \beta \lvert \phi \rangle \right) = \alpha \langle \xi \vert \psi \rangle + \beta \langle \xi \vert \phi \rangle$ and (iii) $\langle \psi \vert \phi \rangle = \langle \phi \vert \psi \rangle^*$. Their physical meaning will become apparent in due course.
- Given a basis $\{ \lvert e_i \rangle \}_{i=1}^d$ for $\mathcal{H}^d$, any vector $\lvert \psi \rangle$ in $\mathcal{H}^d$ can be written as $\lvert \psi \rangle = \sum_{i=1}^d c_i \lvert e_i \rangle$, where the $c_i$ are complex coefficients. If the $\lvert e_i \rangle$ are furthermore orthonormal, then $\langle \psi \vert \psi \rangle = 1 \Longrightarrow \sum_i \lvert c_i \rvert^2 = 1$. As, besides completeness, each $\abs{c_1}^2 \geq 0$, they can be seen as a probability distribution. For this reason, the $c_i$ are sometimes called *probability amplitudes*, and will later be linked with the probabilistic nature of quantum theory. We will frequently be interested in $\mathcal{H}^2$, in which it's common to work with the orthonormal *computational basis* $\{ \lvert 0 \rangle, \lvert 1 \rangle \}$. The vector representations associated with the computational basis elements are $\lvert 0 \rangle \equiv \left( 1 \; 0 \right)^\intercal$ and $\lvert 1 \rangle \equiv \left( 0 \; 1 \right)^\intercal$. Any $\lvert \psi \rangle \in \mathcal{H}^2$ can thus be identified with $\lvert \psi \rangle = \alpha \lvert 0 \rangle + \beta \lvert 1 \rangle = \left( \alpha \; \beta \right)^\intercal$. Due to its analogy to two-level classical systems (bits), a $\ket{\psi} \in \hilbd{2}$ is termed a quantum bit (\emph{qubit}) and, similarly, any $\ket{\psi} \in \hilbd{d}$ is a qu\emph{d}it.
- Physical systems are rarely static. In quantum theory, the evolution of a closed system is governed by $\ket{\psi^\prime} = U\ket{\psi}$, where $U$ is an unitary operator. Because any unitary operator is invertible --- with it's inverse being $U^\dagger$, --- quantum dynamics is reversible. And because $\left( U\ket{\psi} \right)^\dagger = \bra{\psi}U^\dagger$, then $\braopket{\psi}{U^\dagger U}{\psi} = 1$, which means we are indeed taking a pure state onto another. Although this is the only time I'll mention Schrödinger's equation, it is in order to recall that unitary evolution arises from it and that, conversely, any evolution given by a continuous family of unitary transformations $U(t)$ can be described by Schrödinger's equation with a suitable Hamiltonian operator.
- While unitary operators are related to quantum evolution, there is a whole zoo of useful operators in quantum theory. A notoriously special class is that of self-adjoint operators. In finite-dimensional spaces, these are equivalent to Hermitian operators; those $A$'s for which $A = A^\dagger$. For this reason, we'll use any of the two terms interchangeably. Whenever $A$ is self-adjoint, the spectral theorem states it can be diagonalized as $\sum_m m \ketbra{m}{m}$, where the eigenvectors $\ketbra{m}{m}$ are orthonormal projectors and $m \in \mathbb{R}$ the associated eigenvalues.
-  Self-adjoint operators represent physically observable quantities, such as position or momentum, and for this reason are equivalently called \emph{observables}. When an observable $A \in \hilb$ is measured on a state vector $\psi \in \hilb$, we get a measurement result $m$ and a post-measurement state $\ket{\psi_m}$. 
- \emph{Born's rule} --- a key postulate in quantum theory --- states that 
- 
- [... eigenvalues, states etc.]
- [von Neumann measurements and POVMs]
- [Mixed states (versão ensemble, mencionar que não pode interpretar como incerteza por causa da versão emaranhamento a ser comentada depois)]



## Trechos soltos

-  Schrödinger's equation governs the evolution of a state $\ket{\psi(t)}$ through $i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \ket{\psi(t)} = H\ket{\psi(t)}$, where $H$ is the system's Hamiltonian operator. Solving this equation for an arbitrary $H$ is no easy task, 