# Future directions

Albeit the applications discussed in secs. \ref{sec:activation} and \ref{sec:incompatibility-vs-classicality} rely on the projective measurements case of our criterion, their respective generalized instances are easily implementable. They do, however, incur in more demanding computational requirements, as the measurement depolarization factor $t$ can be seen as effectively lowering the insphere radius $\eta$.  It could nevertheless be interesting to investigate applications of it, as for instance showing a nonclassicality activation phenomenon valid for all POVMs.

A second kind of activation phenomenon, emerging by adding more measuremens instead of preparations, has also been observed when the number of preparations is limited \cite{poderini}. Similarly to sec. \ref{sec:activation}, the measurement classicality criterion derived in sec. \ref{sec:measurement-classicality} could be used to attempt on finding a "genuine" form of this result, where all preparations are considered.

An interesting open question in the steering scenario is whether POVMs can be used to demonstrate steering in states where no projective measurements can \cite{}. This naturally extends to the prepare-and-measure scenario. One could approach this question in the following way. Start by selecting classical preparation sets from the results in sec. \ref{sec:activation}, that are only certifiedly classical for projective measurements. Then characterize the facets of a $(d=2, B>2, X=3,Y)$ prepare-and-measure polytope. Finally, search for a set of POVMs that, for some choice of those classical preparations, violates some of the obtained facets.

To aid in future works, all implementations used in this chapter are available at a public code repository \cite{classicality-repository}.