# The prepare-and-measure scenario

The simplest prepare-and-measure setup consists of two ``black-boxes''. One is the preparation device P, handled by Alice, and the other the measurement device M, handled by Bob. Nothing about the inner workings of these devices is assumed \emph{a priori} (see \ref{sec:introduction}), except that P prepares and communicates physical systems to M, which extracts information from the received preparations by measuring it.

Alice is allowed to interact with her device through a classical input $x \in \mathcal{X} \equiv \natrange{X} \equiv [X]$. Her choice may weight on the probability $\condprob{m}{x}$ with which a state labeled by $m \in \mathcal{S}$, where $\mathcal{S}$ is the set of possible preparations, is prepared.

Similarly, Bob can choose a configuration $y \in \mathcal{Y} \equiv [Y]$ for the measurement device, which will thence output $b \in \mathcal{B} \equiv [B]$ with probability $\condprob{b}{m,y}$. This reflects the fact that the outcome of the experiment is both influenced by the received message and Bob's choice of measurement (fig. \ref{fig:pam}).

A last, indispensable condition is that neither Alice nor Bob know what happens in each other's labs. In other words, she must have no knowledge of $y$, as this is a choice made in her causal future, and he cannot know what was her choice $x$ of preparation, as this trivializes the scenario in a sense that will later be made precise. Taken together, these constraints amount to saying that all communication between them is mediated by the message $m$. Given that our intention is to study how this communication influence the observed statistics, this is clearly a natural assumption.

An ``experiment'' is a single run of the protocol described above. After many rounds of such experiments, Alice and Bob are allowed to share their knowledge with each other, and together they can build the \emph{behavior} $\mathbf{p} = \{ \condprob{b}{x,y} \}_{b,x,y}$ of their devices. Naturally, each $\condprob{b}{x,y} \geq 0$ and $\sum_b \condprob{b}{x,y} = 1, \,\forall x,y$ or, equivalently, $\mathbf{p}$ is a collection of conditional probability distributions, one for any fixed choice of a pair of settings $(x,y)$.

We now arrive at the central question of (semi)device-independent quantum information: if all we have is the behavior $\mathbf{p}$, with no (or restricted) access to the actual workings of the devices, can we still certify some property about the states, measurements, or anything of interest? For instance, could we, by only observing $\mathbf{p}$, affirm that P prepares quantum --- and not classical ---, states? Or that M applies non-projective measurements? In many cases, the answer, surprisingly, is \emph{yes} \cite{}.
