## Prepare-and-measure communication protocols

The preeminent practical interest in prepare-and-measure scenarios is due to the fact that quantum communication can beat classical protocols in many tasks that can me modeled as preparing and measuring states \cite{tavakoli-zukowski,buhrman,etc}. These include cryptographic key distribution \cite{}, secret sharing \cite{} and communication complexity \cite{}. Simplifiedly, the latter deals with the question of how much is the least amount of communication needed to compute or approximate some function $f(x,y)$ where the inputs $x$ and $y$ are distributed. Prepare-and-measure scenarios clearly resemble this structure. All we have to do is to stipulate a figure of merit that, generally depending on $f$, measures how well some protocol performs. If we additionally manage to show some separation between the best performance achievable, for instance, in $\mathcal{C}_d^\lambda$ against $\mathcal{Q}_d^\lambda$, we can prove quantum advantage in the task. A special and widely studied choice of $f(x,y) = x_y$ leads us to the so-called \emph{random access coding} (RAC) protocol.

### Random access coding

An $\rac{n}{d}{m}$ random access code (RAC) is a communication task in which a party --- commonly called Alice, --- is given a $n$-length $d$itstring $\mathbf{x} = x_1 x_2 \ldots x_n$, with each $x_i \in \{0, \ldots, d - 1 \}$, and required to encode it in another ditstring $\mathbf{a}$ of length $m$, where $m < n$.

The $m$ dits representing $\mathbf{a} = \mathcal{E}(\mathbf{x})$, where $\mathcal{E} : \{0, \ldots, d - 1\}^n \mapsto \{0, \ldots, d - 1\}^m$ is an encoder function, is then sent to a second party, whom we'll call Bob. Bob is queried with an $y \in \{1, \ldots, n\}$ and must correspondingly guess what was the value of $x_y$. His guess may be modeled through $n$ decoding functions $\mathcal{D}_y : \{0, \ldots, d - 1\}^m \mapsto \{0, \ldots, d - 1\}$ that are chosen depending on the query $y$. We name \textit{encoding-decoding strategy} the ordered tuple $(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{D}_{1},\ldots,\mathcal{D}_{n})$.

When Alice and Bob use the same strategy in all rounds of the protocol, the observed statistics are always deterministic, i.e, the probability of Bob answering $b$ is given by $\condprob{b}{\mathbf{x}, y} = \delta\left[b, (\mathcal{D}_{y} \circ \mathcal{E})(\mathbf{x})\right]$, and in each round of a RAC, Bob's probability of guessing the right value is given by $p(b = x_y \mid \mathbf{x}, y)$.

She and he must cooperate to guess as best as they can. Their performance is typically measured through the \emph{worst-case success probability} $p_{\text{worst}}$, defined as the minimum guess probability $p(b = x_y \mid \mathbf{x}, y)$ occurring for their particular encoding-decoding strategy. When the best possible strategy for an $\rac{n}{d}{m}$ scenario is such that $p_{\text{worst}} \leq 0.5$, the RAC is said to not exist, as in that case a better or equivalent performance could be achieved through simply guessing.

Shared randomness is known to improve performance in this task. This is done by allowing the encoding and decoding functions to be correlated by some pre-established random variable $\lambda$. For a concrete example, consider the simplest $\rac{2}{2}{1}$ scenario. When no SR is allowed, $p_{\text{worst}} \leq 0.5$ \cite{ambinis-nayak-vazirani-1999}. With SR, however, Alice and Bob can cooperate in the following way. Before each round, a random variable $\lambda \in \{0, 1\}$ instructs Alice to send $\mathbf{a} = x_\lambda$. Bob knows $\lambda$, so if he's queried with $y = \lambda$, he can answer correctly with certainty; otherwise he can just flip a coin. Of course, we still have $p_{\text{worst}} \leq 0.5$ in this situation. However, it is known \cite{ambainis-srqrac} that when SR is allowed, the best possible strategy is such that \review{Confirmar se é isso mesmo}

$$
p_{\text{worst}} = p_{\text{avg}} \equiv \frac{1}{nd^n} \sum_{\mathbf{x},y} \condprob{b=x_y}{\mathbf{x},y} ,
$$

and hence that a $\rac{2}{2}{1}$ SR-RAC with $p_{\text{worst}} = 0.75$ exists.

Something else that can further improve performance is allowing quantum communication. In this case we interpret the encoders $\mathcal{E}(\mathbf{x}) = \rho_x \in \mathcal{D}(d)$ as preparation procedures and the decoders $\mathcal{D}_y = \{ E_{b \mid y} \}_b$ as quantum measurements.

Quantum random access codes (QRACs) first appeared in \cite{wiesner1983conjugate} and were later rediscovered and linked to quantum automata in \cite{ambainis1999dense}. With this popularization, multiple new results and experimental demonstrations regarding the existence and advantage of QRACs over their classical counterparts rapidly ensued \cite{nayak1999optimal,ambainis2002dense,hayashi20064,ambainis2008quantum,spekkens2009preparation,li2012semi,pawlowski-qkd-2011,czechlewski2018device}.

Mapping QRACs to prepare-and-measure scenarios with quantum communication amounts to choosing $\abs{\mathcal{X}} = d^n$ preparations $\rho_{x} \in \mathcal{D}(d)$, and $\abs{\mathcal{Y}} = n$  choices of POVMs with $\abs{\mathcal{B}} = d$ outcomes each \cite{vicente2019}. The set of behaviors is then $\mathcal{Q}_{d,d^n,n}$, and optimizing the protocol means looking for a $\mathbf{p} \in \mathcal{Q}_{d,d^n,n}$ that maximizes either $p_{\text{worst}}$ or $p_{\text{avg}}$, depending on which is the chosen figure of merit. In the next chapter we will make use of this mapping to demonstrate an interesting quantum advantage activation phenomenon in QRACs.

Additionally to RACs, SR-RACs and QRACs, one could also investigate SR-QRACs \cite{ambainis-srqrcas}, EA-RACs \cite{pawlowski} and EA-QRACs, where ``EA'' stands for \emph{entanglement-assited}. Each of these cases (which I'll herein collectively refer to as simply "RACs") could analogously be mapped to a PM scenario, and the optimal solutions would be searched for inside the PM behavior sets $\mathcal{C}$, $\mathcal{C}^\lambda$, $\mathcal{Q}$, $\mathcal{Q}^\lambda$, $\mathcal{C}^\rho$ and $\mathcal{Q}^\rho$, respectively.

To end this section I note that while RACs can be cast as an instance of prepare-and-measure, the inverse is not true. Investigating what different kinds of \emph{information retrieval tasks} \cite{shane} arise from such other instances could be an interesting research problem.

  

### Dense coding

Holevo's bound guarantees that $n$ qubits can perfectly encode no more than $n$ bits of information \cite{holevo-bound}. Calling to mind that $n$ qubits require $2^n - 1$ complex coefficients to be fully described, this result comes to be tremendously surprising. Looking more closely, the setting where this conclusion arises from is a prepare-and-measure scenario with quantum communication but independent devices. Another seminal result proves that when the devices are not independent, but rather, share a maximally entangled state as a resource, it turns possible to communicate two bits (equivalently, a quart) by sending a single qubit.

Dense coding was first proposed by Bennett and Wiesner \cite{} similarly to the following argument. Let Alice and Bob share a two-qubit maximally entangled state $\ket{\Phi^+} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \sum_{i = 0}^{1} \ket{ii}$ (the same argument is valid for any unitary transformation of it). Her task is to communicate one out of four messages to Bob. We label them with choices from the ordered set $\mathcal{X} = (0, 1, 2, 3)$, which can be represented by a quart. They previously agree on some special set of transformations, hereby $\Lambda = (\id,\sigma_x, \sigma_y, \sigma_z)$, where $\sigma_i$ are the Pauli matrices, to represent the respective encodings. Alice's encoding of $x$ is a simple matter of applying $\Lambda_x$ to her share of $\ket{\Phi^+}$. After receiving her qubit, Bob will have the state $\left( \Lambda_x \otimes \id \right) \ketbra{\Phi^+}{\Phi^+}$. The four possibilities are mutually orthogonal, thus can be perfectly distinguished by some suitable measurement (e.g., a standard Bell-basis measurement). He will hence be able to recover $x$.

Purposefully, I have framed the protocol in the previously introduced notation for a PM scenario with quantum communication and entanglement-assistance. My intention was to suggest that dense coding can be made device-independent, as it indeed can. More than that, several generalizations of this protocol are possible. The most straightforward generalizations are to consider the consequences of higher dimensional communication and entanglement \cite{bennettdensecoding} or mixed-state entanglement \cite{}, but one could also analyze unbounded entanglement \cite{tavakoli} or even dense coding protocols with errors \cite{nayaknew,moreno}. In chapter \ref{chap:pam-quantum}, I will detailedly show how we can use insights from prepare-and-measure scenarios to study the latter case.