# States, transformations and measurements

[Citação Asher Peres]

States, transformations and measurements are the basic building blocks in the description of any physical system. Quantum and classical mechanics significantly differ in regard to measurements. While in the latter we gloss over the concept, taking for granted that any physical property of a state is trivially accessible, in the former we must not. In this section I review the mathematical structures that quantum theory assigns to each of these building blocks, calling for special attention to quantum measurements. 



A \emph{quantum state} is described by a \emph{density operator}, commonly denoted by $\rho$.  Any density operator is a linear, unit-trace and positive-semidefinite operator in a Hilbert space $\hilb$. Conversely, any operator satisfying these properties represents a valid quantum state. Hence, $\mathcal{D}(d) = \{ \rho \in \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{H}^d) \mid \text{tr}\rho=1, \rho \succeq0 \}$, where $\mathcal{L}(\mathcal{H}^d)$ is the set of linear operators in $\mathcal{H}^d$, is the space of density operators in dimension $d$. Only finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces will be considered.

As $\rho \succeq 0 \Longrightarrow \rho = \rho^\dagger$, we can use the spectral decomposition to write $\rho = \sum_m m \Pi_m$, where each $\Pi_m$ is a projection onto the eigenspace of the eigenvector of $\rho$ associated with eigenvalue $m$. Such eigenvectors are orthogonal. They need not be normalized, but we can always and will take them as being. Orthogonality imply that $\Pi_m \Pi_n = \delta_{mn} \Pi_m$ and $1 \leq \text{rank}(\rho) \leq d$, and normalization that $\tr{\Pi_m} = 1$.  Furthermore, all $m \geq 0$, and $\tr{\rho} = 1 \Longrightarrow \sum_m m = 1$. 

You may recall the more usual definition that a quantum state is described by a unit vector in a Hilbert space and, conversely, that such unit vectors describe quantum states. This is only true for a subset of states called \emph{pure quantum states}. 

Following along the tradition, we will denote pure quantum states as $\lvert \psi \rangle$, where $\psi$ is some label that describes the state. Similar notation is used for the dual vector $\left( \lvert \psi \rangle \right)^\dagger \equiv \langle \psi \rvert$, which is useful to write the inner product between any two vectors in the same space as $\langle \psi \vert \phi \rangle$, and the outer product as $\lvert \psi \rangle \langle \phi \rvert$. An useful geometric intuition on these products is to interpret the inner product as the overlap between $\vert \psi \rangle$ and $\vert \phi \rangle$, and an outer product $\lvert \psi \rangle \langle \psi \rvert$ as a projection onto $\lvert  \psi \rangle$.

Recalling that all eigenvectors of a density operator $\rho$ are normalized, we may now interpret the $\Pi_m \equiv \ketbra{m}{m}$ as projections onto the pure states labeled by $\ket{m}$, and the spectral decomposition $\rho = \sum_m m \Pi_m$ as a probability distribution, weighted by the eigenvalues $m$, over those. Any pure state $\ket{\psi}$ can equivalently be described as $\rho = \ketbra{\psi}{\psi}$, and whenever $\text{rank}(\rho) = 1$, we may infer that $\rho$ stands for a pure state. Equivalently, whenever $\rho$ is such a one-dimensional projection, the \emph{purity} $\tr{\rho^2} = 1$, while in general $1/d \leq \tr{\rho^2} \leq 1$. This is one of the reasons why density matrices are more general than pure states. All other density operators (i.e., those of non-unit rank) are said to describe \emph{mixed quantum states}. Although the spectral decomposition of $\rho$ suggests that a mixed state can be interpreted as a probability distribution over pure states, the understanding of a mixed state as lack of knowledge on the exact state of the system should not be taken literally. One of several reasons for this assertion is that there are infinitely many different pure state ensembles generating the same density operator \cite{Physics Letters A 183 (1993) 14-18}.

Given a basis $\{ \lvert e_i \rangle \}_{i=1}^d$ for $\mathcal{H}^d$, any pure state $\lvert \psi \rangle$ in $\mathcal{H}^d$ can be written as $\lvert \psi \rangle = \sum_{i=1}^d c_i \lvert e_i \rangle$, where the $c_i \in \mathbb{C}$ and $\sum_i \abs{c_i}^2 = 1$ due to $\braket{\psi}{\psi} = 1$. We will frequently be interested in $\mathcal{H}^2$, in which it's common to work with the orthonormal *computational basis* $\{ \lvert 0 \rangle, \lvert 1 \rangle \}$. The vector representations associated with the computational basis elements are $\lvert 0 \rangle \equiv \left( 1 \; 0 \right)^\intercal$ and $\lvert 1 \rangle \equiv \left( 0 \; 1 \right)^\intercal$. Any $\lvert \psi \rangle \in \mathcal{H}^2$ can thus be identified with $\lvert \psi \rangle = c_1 \lvert 0 \rangle + c_2 \lvert 1 \rangle = \left( c_1 \; c_2 \right)^\intercal$. An extension to a generalized computational basis $\{ \ket{d} \}_{d}$ is similarly done. Due to its analogy with two-level classical systems (bits), a $\ket{\psi} \in \hilbd{2}$ is termed a quantum bit (\emph{qubit}) and, similarly, any $\ket{\psi} \in \hilbd{d}$ is a qu\emph{d}it.

We now know how to describe static physical systems, which is something that physical systems rarely are. In quantum theory, the evolution of a closed system is governed by the Schrödinger equation. Its solution dictates that an initial state $\rho$ that transforms to $\rho^\prime$ does so unitarily following $\rho^\prime = U \rho U^\dagger$. Here, $U$ must be an unitary operator, which means that $UU^\dagger = U^\dagger U = \id$. Given $U$, we can always find a Hamiltonian $H$ and a suitable interaction time to perform the evolution.

While density operators are related to quantum states and unitary operators are related to quantum evolution, there is a whole zoo of other useful operators in quantum theory. \emph{Positive semidefinite operators} will be of pivotal importance in defining quantum measurements.

Any property of a quantum system $\rho$ must be assessed by measuring it. Abstractly, a measurement procedure takes a quantum input (i.e., the state) and returns a classical output (the measurement result). Inside certain constraints, which measurement is chosen for a given application depends on the property to be measured (e.g., the $\mathbf{z}$ component of a spin $1/2$ particle), and the number and values of the possible outcomes are associated to the choice of measurement (e.g., either $\pm \hbar/2$ for the spin $1/2$ measurement). A quantum measurement procedure is inherently probabilistic: quantum theory goes only so far as telling us how to ascribe probabilities to each possible outcome. Continuing with the spin example, this means that the quantum formalism will only tell us the probability of getting either the $\pm \hbar/2$ result. When the measurement is actually performed, we may end up with any outcome predicted to have non-zero probability of happening. Depending on this outcome (or rather, on our knowledge of it), the very state $\rho$ that was measured is changed in a non-reversible way. This non-reversibility implies that we cannot fully access $\rho$ with a single copy of the system, a fact that is at the heart of several quantum informational protocols. Although the century-long debate on the nature of quantum measurements is certainly interesting, we will take the pragmatic route and focus on its operational definition.

A positive semidefinite (PSD) operator is a Hermitian operator $E : \hilb \mapsto \hilb$ such that $\braopket{\psi}{E}{\psi} \geq 0, \;\forall \ket{\psi} \in \hilb$. In this case, we denote $E \succeq 0$. We require a quantum measurement to be described by a set $\mathcal{M} = \{ E_m \}_m$ of PSD operators obeying the completeness relation $\sum_m E_m = \id$. The conditions $E_m \succeq 0$ and $\sum_m E_m$ can be interpreted as enforcing that $p(m) \geq 0, \;\forall m$ and $\sum_m p(m) = 1$, for any possible $\rho$. Any such set $\mathcal{M}$ is called a \emph{positive operator-valued measure} (or POVM; also called \emph{unsharp measurement}), and each of its elements a \emph{measurement effect}. The possible outcomes are labeled by $m$. Whenever a measurement $\mathcal{M}$ is performed on a state $\rho$, we get result $m$ with probability $p(m) = \tr{E_m \rho}$. When $\rho = \ketbra{\psi}{\psi}$, this definition recovers the Born rule in its usual form, $p(m) = \braopket{\psi}{E_m}{\psi}$.

A special case of POVMs arise when every $E_m = \Pi_m$, and $\Pi_m \Pi_n = \Pi_m \delta_{mn}$, where the $\Pi_m$ are projection operators. It then follows that $1 \leq \abs{\mathcal{M}} \leq d$. This is the case of \emph{projective measurements} (or PVMs; commonly also called \emph{ideal}, or \emph{sharp}, or \emph{von Neumann} measurements). Quantum mechanics courses usually introduce projective measurements through the concept of \emph{observables}, which are Hermitian operators. Recalling these can be decomposed as $A = \sum_m m \Pi_m$, we can see they define a PVM where the possible outcomes are the eigenvalues $m$ of observable $A$, and the projection operators are a set of orthonormal eigenvectors.

A further restriction on measurements is sometimes put on the rank of each effect. A rank-1 projective measurement happens when $\mathcal{M}$ is projective and $\abs{\mathcal{M}} = d$ or, equivalently, when the associated observable $A$ has no degenerate eigenvalues.

An useful intuition on POVMs is to interpret them as noisy projective measurements. Consider a sharp measurement $\mathcal{M}^\prime = \{ \ketbra{0}{0}, \ketbra{1}{1} \}$. Performed on an arbitrary state $\rho$, we will get the result associated to the the $i$-th projection with probability $p(i) = \tr{\ketbra{i}{i} \rho}$, where $i \in \{0, 1\}$. Suppose, though, that our experimental apparatus is such that it states the wrong result with probability $(1 - w)$. Then $p(i) = w \ketbra{i}{i} + (1 - w) \ketbra{i \oplus1}{i \oplus 1}$, and a measurement describing this situation is $\mathcal{M} = \{ w \ketbra{0}{0} + (1 - w) \ketbra{1}{1}, w \ketbra{1}{1} + (1 - w) \ketbra{0}{0} \}$. It is easy to see that $\mathcal{M}$'s effects are not orthogonal, hence this is not a projective measurement. But it is a valid unsharp measurement.

After a measurement is performed, we may be interested in what happened to $\rho$. As already stated, performing a measurement will generally incur in a mapping $\rho \mapsto \rho^\prime$. Lüders rule \cite{} states that, for a PVM $\{ \Pi_m \}_m$ returning result $m$, $\rho^\prime = \Pi_m \rho \Pi_m / \tr{\rho \Pi_m}$. Two interesting facts are that knowing the updated state requires knowledge of the measurement result, and that retaking the same measurement will produce the same outcome with definiteness. Without access to the measurement result, but knowing that $\{ \Pi_i \}_i$ was performed, all we can say is that $\rho^\prime = \sum_m \Pi_m \rho \Pi_m$. POVMs results are not always reproducible, and the update rule only exists when all effects can be written as $E_m = K_m^\dagger K_m$, where the $K_m$ are called \emph{Kraus operators} \cite{}. A post-measurement state is then given by $\rho^\prime = K_m \rho K_m^\dagger / \tr{\rho E_m}$.

One of the most intriguing aspects of the quantum measurement formalism is that it implies the existence of quantities that may not be simultaneously measured with arbitrary precision on a single copy of a quantum system. Measurements behaving in this way are called \emph{incompatible measurements} \cite{}. Throughout this work, we will understand "compatibility" as a synonym of "joint measurability" \cite{}. A set $\mathcal{M} = \{E_m^x \}_{m, x}$ of $X$ quantum measurements indexed by $x$ with $\mathcal{O}(x)$ outcomes each is said to be \emph{jointly measurable} whenever a parent measurement $J_\ell$ exists. To be a parent measurement, $J_\ell$ must be a valid quantum measurement from which any $E_m^x \in \mathcal{M}$ may be recovered. Letting $\ell = \ell_1\ell_2\ldots\ell_X$, where each $\ell_i \in \{ 1, \ldots, \mathcal{O}(i) \}$, the latter condition requires that $\sum_\ell J_\ell \delta_{m, \ell_x} = E_m^x$. In the plenty of situations where no parent measurement exist, $\mathcal{M}$ is called incompatible or non-jointly measurable. We will get back to this in sec. \ref{sec:incompatibility_robustness}, where we discuss how to quantify how incompatible a measurement set is.

Several other notions of measurement compatibility exist. Introductory quantum mechanics courses, for instance, usually discuss incompatibility as commutativity: two non-commuting observables $A$ and $B$ can only be simultaneously determined up to a degree of certainty, and a trade-off between the standard deviations on the obtained results is given by Robertson's uncertainty relation $\sigma_A \sigma_B \geq \frac{1}{2} \abs{ \langle \left[ A, B \right] \rangle }$. Notably, in this particular case of sharp measurements, commutativity is equivalent to joint-measurability \cite{teiko}. Regarding POVMs, though, this is not the case, as with several other inequivalent definitions of incompatibility, such as non-disturbance and coexistence \cite{}.

On a par with entanglement, measurement incompatibility is a strictly quantum concept, and is unavoidably linked to some of the most intriguing consequences of quantum theory. Decision problems on the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen steering scenario \cite{}, for one, can be one-to-one mapped to joint-measurability problems, in the sense that a measurement set is incompatible if and only if it can be used to demonstrate steering. In the also widely studied Bell nonlocality scenario \cite{}, generating nonlocal statistic require incompatible measurements, but not every set of incompatible measurements is sufficient to observe nonlocality \cite{}. In chap. \ref{chap:pam_classicality} we will show incompatibility is also insufficient for observing nonclassicalities in the prepare-and-measure scenario.

Quantum information is the study of the encoding, processing and decoding of information in quantum systems, which are done by preparing a state $\rho$, transforming, and measuring it. Quantum theory, on the other hand, tells us we should associate these steps to density operators, unitary transformations, and complete collections of positive-semidefinite operators, respectively.



## Trechos soltos

-  A notoriously special class is that of self-adjoint operators. In finite-dimensional spaces, these are equivalent to Hermitian operators; those $A$'s for which $A = A^\dagger$. For this reason, we'll use any of the two terms interchangeably. Whenever $A$ is self-adjoint, the spectral theorem states it can be diagonalized as $\sum_m m \ketbra{m}{m}$, where the eigenvectors $\ketbra{m}{m}$ are orthonormal projectors and $m \in \mathbb{R}$ the associated eigenvalues.
-  Self-adjoint operators represent physically observable quantities, such as position or momentum, and for this reason are equivalently called \emph{observables}. When an observable $A \in \hilb$ is measured on a state vector $\psi \in \hilb$, we get a measurement result $m$ and a post-measurement state $\ket{\psi_m}$. 



-  Schrödinger's equation governs the evolution of a state $\ket{\psi(t)}$ through $i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \ket{\psi(t)} = H\ket{\psi(t)}$, where $H$ is the system's Hamiltonian operator. Solving this equation for an arbitrary $H$ is no easy task, 



- Only finite-dimensional spaces will be considered, and of utmost importance will be the properties that, $\forall \lvert \psi \rangle, \lvert \phi \rangle, \lvert \xi \rangle \in \mathcal{H}^d,$ (i) $\alpha \lvert \psi \rangle + \beta \lvert \phi \rangle \in \mathcal{H}^d$, where $\alpha, \beta \in \mathbb{C}$, (ii) $\langle \xi \rvert \left( \alpha \lvert \psi \rangle + \beta \lvert \phi \rangle \right) = \alpha \langle \xi \vert \psi \rangle + \beta \langle \xi \vert \phi \rangle$ and (iii) $\langle \psi \vert \phi \rangle = \langle \phi \vert \psi \rangle^*$. Their physical meaning will become apparent in due course.



- If the $\lvert e_i \rangle$ are furthermore orthonormal, then $\langle \psi \vert \psi \rangle = 1 \Longrightarrow \sum_i \lvert c_i \rvert^2 = 1$. 



- Given $\rho_1, \rho_2 \in \mathcal{D}(d)$, any convex combination $w \rho_1 + (1 - w) \rho_2$ is also a valid density operator.



- Because any unitary operator is invertible --- with it's inverse being $U^\dagger$, --- quantum dynamics is reversible. And because $\left( U\ket{\psi} \right)^\dagger = \bra{\psi}U^\dagger$, then $\braopket{\psi}{U^\dagger U}{\psi} = 1$, which means we are indeed taking a pure state onto another. Although this is the only time I'll mention Schrödinger's equation, it is in order to recall that unitary evolution arises from it and that, conversely, any evolution given by a continuous family of unitary transformations $U(t)$ can be described by Schrödinger's equation with a suitable Hamiltonian operator.