# Transformations

- We now know how to describe static physical systems, which is something that physical systems rarely are. In quantum theory, the evolution of a closed system is governed by the Schrödinger equation. Its solution dictates that an initial state $\rho$ that transforms to $\rho^\prime$ does so unitarily following $\rho^\prime = U \rho U^\dagger$. Here, $U$ must be an unitary operator, which means that $UU^\dagger = U^\dagger U = \id$. Given $U$, we can always find a Hamiltonian $H$ and a suitable interaction time to perform the evolution. Nonetheless, these are not the most general transformations that a quantum state can undergo.
- Taking the operational approach, we will define the most general transformation as any one that takes a density operator into another, i.e., any $\mathcal{N} : \mathcal{D}(\hilb) \mapsto \mathcal{D}(\hilb^\prime)$. It is then easy to argue that the map $\mathcal{N}$ must be such that, for any $\rho \in \hilb$, it is positive, $\mathcal{N}(\rho) \succeq 0$, and trace-preserving, $\text{tr}\left[ \mathcal{N}(\rho) \right] = 1$.
- Positivity, however, is not a strong enough condition. Suppose that $\hilb = \hilb_A \otimes \hilb_B$, that $\hilb^\prime = \hilb^\prime_A \otimes \hilb^\prime_B$, and that $\mathcal{N} = \id_A \otimes \mathcal{N}_{B \rightarrow B^\prime}$. In some situations like this, a positive $\mathcal{N}_{B \rightarrow B^\prime}$ does not guarantee that $\mathcal{N}$ will map all input states to positive operators. This is precisely the case of the transposition map previously discussed, where the fact the the partial transposition may generate non-positive operators is used as an entanglement criterion. Amending this requires the stronger condition of \emph{complete positivity} (CP), whereby any CP map $\mathcal{N}$ generates a valid density operator even when only applied to some subsystem.
- Together, complete positivity and trace preservation are the conditions that define a CPTP map, or \emph{quantum channel} $\mathcal{N}$, which is the most general type of quantum evolution we will consider.
- These requirements are easily agreeable but they are not very practical. What we must now do is find a computation-friendly representation for CPTP maps. 
- [Transformações em estados compostos: unitaŕia no global mas as vezes queremos operr localmente... então mapas CPTP and isomotphism]