# Measurements



To finish our review of quantum theory, we must remember how to measure a state. While in classical mechanics we usually gloss over the concept of measurements, taking for granted that any physical property of a state is trivially accessible, in quantum theory we must not. On a par with entanglement, measurement incompatibility is a concept at the heart of the most interesting quantum phenomena, especially those with no classical counterpart. It is unavoidably linked to some of the most intriguing consequences of quantum theory. Decision problems on the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen steering scenario \cite{}, for one, can be one-to-one mapped to joint-measurability problems, in the sense that a measurement set is incompatible if and only if it can be used to demonstrate steering. In the also widely studied Bell nonlocality scenario \cite{}, generating nonlocal statistic require incompatible measurements, but not every set of incompatible measurements is sufficient to observe nonlocality \cite{}. In this section I review the main mathematical structures related to quantum measurements, together with some aspects of measurement incompatibility.



Any property of a quantum system $\rho$ must be assessed by measuring it. Abstractly, a measurement procedure takes a quantum input (i.e., the state) and returns a classical output (the measurement result). Inside certain constraints, which measurement is chosen for a given application depends on the property to be measured (e.g., the $\mathbf{z}$ component of a spin $1/2$ particle), and the number and values of the possible outcomes are associated to the choice of measurement (e.g., either $\pm \hbar/2$ for the spin $1/2$ measurement). A quantum measurement procedure is inherently probabilistic: quantum theory goes only so far as telling us how to ascribe probabilities to each possible outcome. Continuing with the spin example, this means that the quantum formalism will only tell us the probability of getting either the $\pm \hbar/2$ result. When the measurement is actually performed, we may end up with any outcome predicted to have non-zero probability of happening. Depending on this outcome (or rather, on our knowledge of it), the very state $\rho$ that was measured is changed in a non-reversible way. This non-reversibility implies that we cannot fully access $\rho$ with a single copy of the system, a fact that is at the heart of several quantum informational protocols. Although the century-long debate on the nature of quantum measurements is certainly interesting, I will take the pragmatic route and focus on its operational definition.

A positive semidefinite (PSD) operator is a Hermitian operator $E : \hilb \mapsto \hilb$ such that $\braopket{\psi}{E}{\psi} \geq 0, \;\forall \ket{\psi} \in \hilb$. In this case, we denote $E \succeq 0$. We require a quantum measurement to be described by a set $M = \{ E_m \}_m$ of PSD operators obeying the completeness relation $\sum_m E_m = \id$. The conditions $E_m \succeq 0$ and $\sum_m E_m$ can be interpreted as enforcing that $p(m) \geq 0, \;\forall m$ and $\sum_m p(m) = 1$, for any possible $\rho$. Any such set $M$ is called a \emph{positive operator-valued measure} (or POVM; also called \emph{unsharp measurement}), and each of its elements a \emph{measurement effect}. The possible outcomes are labeled by $m$. Whenever a measurement $M$ is performed on a state $\rho$, we get result $m$ with probability $p(m) = \tr{E_m \rho}$. When $\rho = \ketbra{\psi}{\psi}$, this definition recovers the Born rule in its usual form, $p(m) = \braopket{\psi}{E_m}{\psi}$.

A special case of POVMs arise when every $E_m = \Pi_m$, and $\Pi_m \Pi_n = \Pi_m \delta_{mn}$, where the $\Pi_m$ are projection operators. It then follows that $1 \leq \abs{M} \leq d$. This is the case of \emph{projective measurements} (or PVMs; commonly also called \emph{ideal}, or \emph{sharp}, or \emph{von Neumann} measurements). Quantum mechanics courses usually introduce projective measurements through the concept of \emph{observables}, which are Hermitian operators. Recalling these can be decomposed as $A = \sum_m m \Pi_m$, we can see they define a PVM where the possible outcomes are the eigenvalues $m$ of observable $A$, and the projection operators are a set of orthonormal eigenvectors.

A further restriction on measurements is sometimes put on the rank of each effect. A rank-1 projective measurement happens when $M$ is projective and $\abs{M} = d$ or, equivalently, when the associated observable $A$ has no degenerate eigenvalues.

An useful intuition on POVMs is to interpret them as noisy projective measurements. Consider a sharp measurement $M^\prime = \{ \ketbra{0}{0}, \ketbra{1}{1} \}$. Performed on an arbitrary state $\rho$, we will get the result associated to the the $i$-th projection with probability $p(i) = \tr{\ketbra{i}{i} \rho}$, where $i \in \{0, 1\}$. Suppose, though, that our experimental apparatus is such that it states the wrong result with probability $(1 - w)$. Then $p(i) = w \ketbra{i}{i} + (1 - w) \ketbra{i \oplus1}{i \oplus 1}$, and a measurement describing this situation is $M = \{ w \ketbra{0}{0} + (1 - w) \ketbra{1}{1}, w \ketbra{1}{1} + (1 - w) \ketbra{0}{0} \}$. It is easy to see that $M$'s effects are not orthogonal, hence this is not a projective measurement. But it is a valid unsharp measurement.

After a measurement is performed, we may be interested in what happened to $\rho$. As already stated, performing a measurement will generally incur in a mapping $\rho \mapsto \rho^\prime$. Lüders rule \cite{} states that, for a PVM $\{ \Pi_m \}_m$ returning result $m$, $\rho^\prime = \Pi_m \rho \Pi_m / \tr{\rho \Pi_m}$. Two interesting facts are that knowing the updated state requires knowledge of the measurement result, and that retaking the same measurement will produce the same outcome with definiteness. Without access to the measurement result, but knowing that $\{ \Pi_i \}_i$ was performed, all we can say is that $\rho^\prime = \sum_m \Pi_m \rho \Pi_m$. POVMs results are not always reproducible, and the update rule only exists when all effects can be written as $E_m = K_m^\dagger K_m$, where the $K_m$ are Kraus operators. A post-measurement state is then given by $\rho^\prime = K_m \rho K_m^\dagger / \tr{\rho E_m}$.

One of the most intriguing aspects of the quantum measurement formalism is that it implies the existence of quantities that may not be simultaneously measured with arbitrary precision on a single copy of a quantum system. Measurements behaving in this way are called \emph{incompatible measurements} \cite{}. Throughout this work, we will understand "compatibility" as a synonym of "joint measurability" \cite{}. A set $\mathcal{M} = \{E_m^x \}_{m, x}$ of $X$ quantum measurements indexed by $x$ with $\mathcal{O}(x)$ outcomes each is said to be \emph{jointly measurable} whenever a parent measurement $J_\ell$ exists. To be a parent measurement, $J_\ell$ must be a valid quantum measurement from which any $E_m^x \in \mathcal{M}$ may be recovered. Letting $\ell = \ell_1\ell_2\ldots\ell_X$, where each $\ell_i \in \{ 1, \ldots, \mathcal{O}(i) \}$, the latter condition requires that $\sum_\ell J_\ell \delta_{m, \ell_x} = E_m^x$. We interpret this as saying that the measurement statistics that the set $\mathcal{M}$ could generate can be reproduced by applying the single measurement $J_\ell$ then coarse-graining the results. In the plenty of situations where no parent measurement exist, $\mathcal{M}$ is called incompatible or non-jointly measurable. We will get back to this topic in sec. \ref{sec:incompatibility_robustness}, where we discuss how to quantify how incompatible a measurement set is.

Several other notions of measurement compatibility exist. Introductory quantum mechanics courses, for instance, usually discuss incompatibility as commutativity: two non-commuting observables $A$ and $B$ can only be simultaneously determined up to a degree of certainty, and a trade-off between the standard deviations on the obtained results is given by Robertson's uncertainty relation $\sigma_A \sigma_B \geq \frac{1}{2} \abs{ \langle \left[ A, B \right] \rangle }$. Notably, in this particular case of sharp measurements, commutativity is equivalent to joint-measurability \cite{teiko}. Regarding POVMs, though, this is not the case, as with several other inequivalent definitions of incompatibility, such as non-disturbance and coexistence \cite{}.

From now on, let us call $\povm(d,n)$ and $\pvm(d,n)$ the set of POVMs and projective measurements, respectively, with $n$ effects acting on $\hilbd{d}$. It is clear that $\pvm(d,n) \subset \povm(d,n)$ for any $d$ and $n$. Now suppose we want to realize an experiment in which we must perform some $M \in \povm(d,n)$ but we only have access to a subset $\mathcal{M} \subset \povm(d,n)$ where $M \notin \mathcal{M}$. Could we, somehow, reproduce the results we would obtain with $M$ by only using $\mathcal{M}$ and classical processing? In many cases, the answer is \emph{yes} \cite{teseleo, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11128-011-0330-2, https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4994303}.

In chap. \sec{chap:pam-classical} we will be mostly interested in when the some set of POVMs can be simulated using only projective measurements. A good starting point is to notice that the trivial measurement $M = \{ \id_d \}_{i=1}^n \subset \povm(d,n)$ can be simulated solely by means of classical post-processing. We can simply sample a result from the uniform distribution on $\{ 1, \ldots, n \}$. Defining the \emph{depolarising map} as 
$$
\Phi_t(O) \mapsto t O + (1-t) \frac{ \tr{O} }{d} \id ,
$$
and its action on a measurement as $\Phi_t (M) \equiv \{ \Phi_t(E_m) \}_m$, we can see that any $M \in \povm(d,n)$, when fully depolarized, is simulatable with classical randomness, hence with projective measurements. The question that now arises is whether we need to go all the way through, or if there is some $t > 0$ that suffices. Astonishingly, a non-trivial, general lower bound of $t = 1/d$ exists, and it turns the whole set $\povm(d,n)$, for any number $n$ of effects, simulatable with projective measurements \cite{oszmaniec}. This bound can be improved for specific cases using optimization techniques, and it is known that, for qubits, $t = \sqrt{2/3} - \epsilon$, for some small $\epsilon$, suffices \cite{teseleo}.







- [Melhorar trecho de atualizacao por operadores de Kraus]



# Trechos soltos

- While density operators are related to quantum states and unitary operators are related to quantum evolution, there is a whole zoo of other useful operators in quantum theory. \emph{Positive semidefinite operators} will be of pivotal importance in defining quantum measurements.

  

# Dúvidas

- Só da pra separar com outra escolha de fatorização no caso de bipartido? Ou vale pra qualquer caso?